# **III.	RECOMMENDATIONS**Effective Open Data laws and policies have been implemented at many levels of government around the country. But no one city or agency in the United States has established a best practices Open Data standard. Instead, we observe fragmented practices and standards across municipalities, different levels of government, and across regions. The result is a patchwork of policies, processes, and practices. The reasons for this fragmentation are not complicated, but they are complex; different cities have different levels of resources, expertise, knowledge, and legal codes. And most cities lack the resources to expend substantial amounts of money and labor to develop robust Open Data policies, let alone to pay for the infrastructure needed to evolve with the advances in technology. The City of Oakland, for example, has a population of around 400,000 and an annual budget of approximately $1 billion. Comparatively, this is a sizable municipal population and budget, yet hiring a Chief Data Officer is well outside of the current budget resources. The key lesson, however, is that the City of Oakland is not alone. The vast majority of cities lack the resources, finances, and skills to implement proper Open Data policies. And few, if any, of those cities are well positioned to adopt policies and practices that keep pace with the constant evolution in technology, especially with respect to balancing privacy concerns. For example, 121 out of 482 cities or 25%,  of California cities are Charter Cities – cities that range from Los Angeles and San Francisco to Vallejo and Truckee. Each of these cities has “supreme authority over municipal affairs,”  which leads to fragmented policies, gaps in practices, and so forth. Conversely, the vast majority of cities, the General Law cities, are unlikely to adopt any policies or practices unless mandated by the State of California. Fragmentation of Open Data policies is compounded by varying privacy regulations across jurisdictional boundaries, both city and state. The likely result, unless otherwise steered, is that collaborative efforts leveraging Open Data to realize societal benefits could be substantially hindered. This makes coordination on a region-wide level critically important.The benefit, however, is that all stakeholders have an incentive to prevent a patchwork of laws. Disparate laws are inhospitable to citizens, business, non-profits organizations, and government. Such a result should motivate policymakers at every level of government to collaborate. To promote more coordination amongst policymakers, the Roundtable recommends the next gathering focus on convening a policy-setting body with a statewide focus. These bodies would include stakeholders from the State and representatives of city-led organizations such as the League of California Cities. The initial focus of these meetings would be to establish a working group addressing the critical question: how do we develop a framework for Open Data policies that apply across the State of California? The focus on the State of California is important. The State of California is in a leadership position to set policies for the General Law cities to adopt progressive Open Data policies immediately, while also erecting a framework for Charter cities in California to follow.Expanded explanations for five specific recommendations:1/	*Host a second Roundtable organized under the leadership of the State of California.*Advances in technology coupled with fragmentation in laws across cities make it almost impossible for smaller municipalities to stay current on good data practices and management. Equally important, it is unlikely that the vast majority of municipalities will be able to promulgate regulations and policies quickly enough to keep pace with technology. Consequently, coordination and collaboration amongst regional actors will be needed. Accordingly, the Roundtable recommends the development of a statewide working group dedicated to Open Data and Local Government Data Practices.  The working group would operate under a third party organization that can convene government, private, and nonprofit leaders to deliver a living set of resources, guidance, and standards. This group, while not led by government, would be flexible enough to manage a range of stakeholders and coordinate efforts statewide.2/	*Build an online resource dedicated to supporting Open Data initiatives by local governments in California.* There are many resources about Open Data for government officials, but these resources are distributed throughout the State of California, the United States, and even globally. As a result, resources often fail to provide the direct analysis and tools needed for the individuals who must implement the Open Data policies; that information is far too diffused. For example, many cities lack the internal expertise to know which resources in fact to adopt. This leads to increased policy fragmentation or just an outright failure to implement practices and policies.Accordingly, the Roundtable recommends a centralized online resource. This online tool may be built under the umbrella of an existing department within the State of California or by a third party organization (such as an academic center or nonpartisan think tank). It is important that this online resource serve as a trusted source, focused specifically on addressing the needs of government officials and providing training, resources, and expertise. 3/	*Initiate research focused on five critical issues.*The Roundtable was able to identify at least five critical topics for further discussion. The issues, developed in more detail below, consist of (i) discerning the different objectives underlying FOIA and Open Data, respectively; (ii) refining data classification policies; (iii) establishing policy-setting bodies and chief data officers; (iv) identifying the emergence of non-consensual transparency; and (v) shifting liability to externalities. Each of these substantial issues warrants a dedicated discussion for further academic study and policy analysis. Accordingly, the Roundtable recommends the launch of a more expansive research project to drill down into these issues. This project would include a combination of white papers and blog posts, and workshops to teach and disseminate the findings for practical application by government officials. 4/	*Organize a California CIO G7 working group to provide subject matter expertise.* In 2010, seven Chief Information Officers (CIO) from around the United States, dubbed the G7, launched an informal working group to “to share ideas and collaborate on IT projects.” Two of the founding G7 members were from California. Unfortunately, distance and turnover prevented the G7 from achieving many of their goals. Although the national model might not be operationally feasible, a regional gathering of California CIO’s would provide a technical working group that could provide subject matter expertise and serve as a resource for both state lawmakers and local governments.Accordingly, the Roundtable recommends launching a California specific G7 (CG7), under the guidance of the California CIO and coordinated with the California Government Operations Agency.  Unlike the proposed working group recommended above, the CG7 would focus on technical specifications and coordinating data management efforts around the State. Importantly, this effort would fall under existing initiatives  by the Office of the California CIO, but would leverage the CIO as a convener to focus on the issue of Open Data.5/	*Generate model legislation and standardized frameworks, for policy and practice.*Standardization across Charter cities is incredibly difficult to manage.  This has led to fragmentation, gaps, and inconsistencies in policy development and implementation. These inefficiencies make it more difficult for smaller companies and organizations to develop new tools and products that can scale, thereby increasing the costs for all stakeholders. Developing a playbook for cities to adopt, or at minimum, to assist in the analysis of their Open Data initiatives, would go far in establishing a shared language to learn and collaborate. Accordingly, the Roundtable recommends a concerted effort to develop a California-specific policy manual that outlines and provides models on how cities can (i) set up a Committee with sufficient authority to manage Open Data efforts; (ii) formalize the role of Chief Data Officer or identify external resources to manage data policies; (iii) and implement practices and procedures. **CONCLUSION**The impetus for the Government Data & Privacy Roundtable was the recognition of the unique challenges municipal governments face when adopting Open Data practices and policies. The City Attorney of Oakland is taking steps to address those challenges and push forward. Yet this is completely new ground for all stakeholders involved. Accordingly, the most significant takeaway from the Roundtable was that these new initiatives require a new approach to local government; successful implementation of good data stewardship means cities must work in coordination. The traditional approach of working in isolation and learning from shared lessons passed from city to city via individual government employees is insufficient. The very nature of Open Data requires cities to modify how they approach rulemaking through integrated collaboration and collective standards.This Report is just the first step in providing a framework for that discussion. The issues and recommendations discussed are meant to prompt more study, more work, and more engagement. Open Data laws, policies, and practices, have the opportunity to launch a wave of innovation. Startup Policy Lab looks forward to working with policymakers at every level of government, industry leaders, and the community to promote Open Data, while balancing good privacy practices that embrace new approaches to leveraging data.